A Short History of Progress

Outside of August



Anomaly – Anne Flemming – (fiction – 2 sisters in Toronto – 1970s)


Spin – Robert Charles Wilson (Science Fiction – or speculative fiction?)
The Hour I First Believed – Wally Lamb (fiction – American)

Dreaming the Eagle – Manda Scott (fiction – pre roman Britain)

Emily Carr

Outside of August
Moonlit Cage

Me and the Blondes


A Long Way Gone

Astrid and Veronica
Divisadero

the Book of Literary Anacdotes
The Zahir
Thanks for the Memories

British Women's Novels: A Reading List, 1775-1818 
Last Updated 3 July 2003




Elizabeth Helme Lousa; or, The Cottage on the Moor 1787
This was an international bestseller and is still a great read. The scene opens 
with the heroine splattered with blood. She thinks she has murdered her father 
who tried to rape her. Need I say more about the book? That's a plot that would 
still be a bestseller today. The heroine is befriended by a kind-hearted 
vegitarian, yes, vegitarian. 





Ann Radcliffe - anything by  Ann Radcliffe A Sicilian Romance 1790 Arno  Ann 
Radcliffe The Mysteries of Udolpho 1794
When I taught this novel in my Women Writers course at Cal State SB, I listed 
as key events to motivate my students' reading: " The Narrative Frame; The 
Mystery of the Southern Part of the Castle; A Stepmother's Jealousy; Love; A 
Forced Marriage; An Escape Attempt; A Wound; Imprisonment; A Pursuit; Banditti; 
Female Friendship; The Abbey; A Nun's Tale; Abate vs. Marquis; A Rescue; 
Another Rescue; The Marquis' Secret; Murders." The novel owes a lot to 
Stephanie Genlis' Adele et Theodore, ou Lettres sur l'education, which had 
English editions published in 1783, 1784, 1788, and 1796. Ann Radcliffe The 
Italian 1797
Some see this as Radcliffe's greatest. It is full of the Inquisition, evil 
religious figures of every sort, and great picturesque and sublime scenery 
descriptions. Vivid comic servants and an independent, self-employed heroine 
add to the enjoyment of the novel.

Helen Maria Williams Julia, A Novel 1790 
This tale of love triangles rewrites in a feminist way Jean Jacques Rousseau's 
international bestseller, La nouvelle Heloise. The novel includes poems, 
descriptions of sublime scenery, and satiric portraits of London's social 
climbers. One of my favorite scenes is the attempt to give a fashionable card 
party in a room too small with servants most incompetent. It's a comic gem! 





Jane West A Gossip's Story 1797
Fascinating tale of two sisters--one who is involved in a very romantic 
friendship with another woman. In discussing this female friendship, the novel 
seems clearly to be referring to a lesbian subtext. The novel is extremely 
funny in its satire, and many speak of it as a model for Austen's Sense and 
Sensibility. 
 

Susan Ferrier Marriage 1818 {see her portrait}
Marriage is an enjoyable, funny novel dealing with the life of twin girls, born 
to a silly London beauty who eloped with a Scotsman. He was disinherited, and 
poverty in Scotland is too much for the beauty to endure. She leaves with one 
twin, Adelaide Julia, and leaves the other, Mary, to be raised in Scotland by 
her aunt, Mrs. Douglas, and her three great-aunts: Miss Jacky, Miss Grizzy, and 
Miss Nicky. Of course, when Mary is ready for marriage, she reunites with her 
sister and fun complications occur which of course contrast a fashionable 
London education and a good, moral Scottish education. 

How the Garcia Girls Lost Their Accents
Uprooted from their family home in the Dominican Republic, the four Garcia 
sisters arrive in New York City in 1960 to find a life far different from the 
genteel existence of maids, manicures, and extended family they left behind.


 If On a Winter’s Night A Traveler
This brilliantly crafted novel written in a form, style, and structure all its 
own has as its backdrop a love story between two readers, both victims of a 
botched novel.

 Paris Trout
A white shopkeeper murders a young black woman and lurches into insanity.

After Life
Naomi Ash is a spiritualist, a medium, a faker (call it what you will), who 
lives with her mother (also a spiritualist, a medium, a faker) in a small town 
in upstate New York filled with spiritualists, mediums, and fakers.



The Bookshop
Innocent widow Florence Green attempts to open a bookshop in an English seaside 
village but finds her enterprise thwarted by an upper-class snob and her 
toadying acolytes.

The Blue Flower
Set during the height of the Romantic Era in late 18th century Germany, this 
engaging novel is based on the life of the Romantic poet and artistic genius 
Novalis.

A Gathering of Old Men
When a Cajun farmer is murdered outside the home of an elderly black plantation 
worker, several other aging black men of
the plantation and the white woman who owns it rally around, each claiming to 
be guilty of the murder.

The Sisters: The Saga of the Mitford Sisters
The Mitford sisters, who grew up between the wars, were notorious British 
debutantes who fueled the rumor mill for years with their scandals and 
politics. A riveting look at five uncompromising and extraordinary women. 
[03/2005]



Here’s Your Hat, What’s Your Hurry
An American Library Association Notable Book, this collection of marvelously 
inventive short stories introduces many quirky characters and weird situations, 
all described in a down-to-earth voice and endearing language.

The Unfastened Heart
Unforeseen complications arise when a group of well-meaning, lovelorn women 
concoct a scheme to make their beloved friend Anna fall in love with the 
widower next door.

Ponder Heart
A wonderful comic novel about the trial of Uncle Daniel Ponder, who is accused 
of killing his much younger second wife, Bonnie Dee Peacock.

Written on the Body
A narrator of undisclosed gender describes a passionate relationship with a 
married woman.

 
I wrote before, recommending Tracy Chevalier's novels.  If you're an Austen 
fan, you'll probably find hers very enjoyable, concerning as they do, real 
people late 1700's early 1800's.  I've just picked up her latest, 'Remarkable 
Creatures', about two women scientists and their fossil discoveries in 
England.  I haven't read it yet, but have been wondering why more of her books 
aren't grabbed for filming.  Researching, I discover that this one has, too.
 
I'
Descartes Baby, 

Being Dead is No Excuse: The Official Southern Ladies Guide to Hosting the 
Perfect 
Funeral                                    
          
By Gayden Metcalfe and Charlotte Hays
Being Dead is No Excuse is the perfect gift to give anyone, anytime and I’m 
going to start with my relatives even though there’s no-one among my family 
or friends who is about to pop off. We all could benefit from a little black 
humour when it’s our turn and go out with a knee-slapping guffaw. For now, we 
can read, laugh, and plan our wakes.
 At the very least after reading Being Dead is No Excuse: The Official 
Southern Ladies Guide to Hosting the Perfect Funeral you’ll want to be 
invited to a Mississippi Delta funeral and partake in the fine funeral food.
 According to authors Gayden Metcalfe and Charlotte Hays, it seems down south 
in the Mississippi Delta that “there are rules for kicking the bucket 
tastefully, and having a flawless funeral is one of them.” In this book, 
“flawless” is a matter of interpretation, but rest assured, each chapter 
has plenty of tempting recipes. As for flawless Southern etiquette: “The 
Episcopalian ideal of a gentleman is a man who, if a lady falls down drunk, 
will pick her up and freshen her drink.” Lists are big too: The Top Ten 
Funeral Foods, The Delta Funeral Hit Parade (Keep a-Goin’ isn’t on it), 
Southern Funeral Flowers Don’ts and Do’s, and The Eternal Pantry list that 
will ensure any cook is ever ready to whip up a funeral feast at the drop of 
any nearest and dearest.  
What to serve at my funeral? Bring on the Mason-Dixon curried chicken salad, 
vodka cake, Aunt Hebe’s coconut cake, pickled shrimp, and just maybe the Bing 
cherry salad with Coca-Cola.
Reviewed by Judith Lane, wine and food writer
 

