How the Garcia Girls Lost Their Accents
Uprooted from their family home in the Dominican Republic, the four Garcia 
sisters arrive in New York City in 1960 to find a life far different from the 
genteel existence of maids, manicures, and extended family they left behind.

Undaunted Courage
Extremely readable account of Lewis and Clark’s great journey. It relies 
heavily on the journals of Lewis and Clark.

Giovanni’s Room
David, an American expatriate in Paris, attempts to repress his homosexuality 
by proposing to Hella Lincoln, but finds that he is unable to continue to live 
a lie when he meets Giovanni, an Italian bartender.

 If On a Winter’s Night A Traveler
This brilliantly crafted novel written in a form, style, and structure all its 
own has as its backdrop a love story between two readers, both victims of a 
botched novel.

The Awakening
An early feminist novel in which a young woman rebels against her staid husband 
and constricted life and falls in love with a younger man, caused a scandal 
when it was first published in 1899.

 Paris Trout
A white shopkeeper murders a young black woman and lurches into insanity.

After Life
Naomi Ash is a spiritualist, a medium, a faker (call it what you will), who 
lives with her mother (also a spiritualist, a medium, a faker) in a small town 
in upstate New York filled with spiritualists, mediums, and fakers.

Like Water for Chocolate
In turn-of-the-century Mexico, the youngest daughter of wicked Mama Elena is 
predestined to spend her life unmarried and can only communicate her love for 
Pedro (her sister’s husband) through culinary sorcery that wreaks havoc upon 
her entire family.

The Bookshop
Innocent widow Florence Green attempts to open a bookshop in an English seaside 
village but finds her enterprise thwarted by an upper-class snob and her 
toadying acolytes.

The Blue Flower
Set during the height of the Romantic Era in late 18th century Germany, this 
engaging novel is based on the life of the Romantic poet and artistic genius 
Novalis.

Madame Bovary
Set in the French countryside, Emma Bovary has upper class aspirations, but 
finds herself trapped in an utterly bourgeois marriage.

A Gathering of Old Men
When a Cajun farmer is murdered outside the home of an elderly black plantation 
worker, several other aging black men of
the plantation and the white woman who owns it rally around, each claiming to 
be guilty of the murder.

The End of the Affair
After Sarah suddenly refuses to continue with their love affair, Maurice 
Bendrix hires a detective to discover why she broke off the relationship. This 
novel is set in England during the 1940s.

To Kill a Mockingbird
Lee's Pulitzer Prize-winning first (and last) novel is a coming of age novel 
about race and injustice in a small Southern town.

The Sisters: The Saga of the Mitford Sisters
The Mitford sisters, who grew up between the wars, were notorious British 
debutantes who fueled the rumor mill for years with their scandals and 
politics. A riveting look at five uncompromising and extraordinary women. 
[03/2005]

A Change of Climate
After thirty years of marriage, Ralph's affair brings to the surface questions 
about faith, unfaithfulness, and how to live unselfishly without destroying 
yourself or those you love.

Mendel’s Dwarf
Dr. Benedict Lambert, a geneticist and a dwarf (as well as a distant relative 
of Gregor Mendel), finds that his love affair with a shy librarian wreaks 
disaster in both their lives.

Here’s Your Hat, What’s Your Hurry
An American Library Association Notable Book, this collection of marvelously 
inventive short stories introduces many quirky characters and weird situations, 
all described in a down-to-earth voice and endearing language.

A Confederacy of Dunces
Obese, gaseous, unemployed social critic Ignatius J. Reilly transforms 
successive employment opportunities into full-blown comical disasters, as a 
result of an ongoing revolt against his devoted, mildly alcoholic mother, his 
girlfriend, and the entire modern world.

Huck Finn
The classic tale of Huck, Jim, and the Mississippi River.

Morality Play
Nicholas Barber, a priest fleeing the monastery for breaking his vow of 
chastity, encounters and joins up with a traveling troupe of actors who perform 
Morality Plays. When they perform in a village where a young boy has recently 
been murdered, Barber faces intrigue and danger. This well-crafted historical 
novel is set in the 14th century.

The Underpainter
75 year old Austin Fraser reflects on his life as a painter, in which his total 
absorption into his art has caused him to carelessly (and cruelly) destroy the 
lives of his closest friends.

The Unfastened Heart
Unforeseen complications arise when a group of well-meaning, lovelorn women 
concoct a scheme to make their beloved friend Anna fall in love with the 
widower next door.

Girl in Hyacinth Blue
There are only 35 known Vermeers extant in the world today but Susan Vreeland 
posits the existence of a 36th with a linked series of stories tracing the 
"life" of the painting back to it's creation in Vermeer's studio.


Meely LaBauve
A high-spirited, Huck Finn like coming of age story set in the Louisiana 
bayous, and featuring one of the most original and
likeable narrators: Emile (Meely) LaBauve, with a large cast of characters, 
both human and not.

Ponder Heart
A wonderful comic novel about the trial of Uncle Daniel Ponder, who is accused 
of killing his much younger second wife, Bonnie Dee Peacock.

Age of Innocence
This 1921 Pulitzer Prize-winning novel chronicles Newland Archer’s confused 
emotions as he prepares to marry docile May Welland, while harboring a secret 
passion for the mysterious Countess Ellen Olenska.


Written on the Body
A narrator of undisclosed gender describes a passionate relationship with a 
married woman.

