British Women's Novels: A Reading List, 1775-1818 
Last Updated 3 July 2003

Frances Burney Evelina 1778 [See this page for some reviews or to buy the 
book.] 
This novel is so mainstream now it seems hardly necessary to comment on it; 
scholarly journals have devoted entire issues to critical analyses of this 
novel. The novel is told by a passive aggressive young woman who is trapped in 
a society that gives her no-win, double-bind rules about life. Evelina is a 
real woman; at time she is a sweet girl, a snob, a catty teenager, a craven 
coward, an innocent victim in a frightening world of rapists and prostitutes, a 
clever commentator on a crazy society ... 1780-1789

Frances Burney Cecilia 1782
This is one of the greatest novels ever written in my opinion. In the 1780s and 
1790s, characters in other novels read Cecilia and praise the book. Burney's 
diaries are full of comments from readers as well, letting us know just about 
everyone who was anyone in those days read the novel. The novel is so rich and 
so full of vivid, creative, memorable characters that it is difficult to convey 
in a few words the power of the book. At one point during my first reading of 
the novel, I hurled the book from me across the room in a burst of passion 
about a plot twist--in the eight or nine years that I've been reading since 
then, I've never again experienced such enraged engagement with a novel. 

Elizabeth Helme Lousa; or, The Cottage on the Moor 1787
This was an international bestseller and is still a great read. The scene opens 
with the heroine splattered with blood. She thinks she has murdered her father 
who tried to rape her. Need I say more about the book? That's a plot that would 
still be a bestseller today. The heroine is befriended by a kind-hearted 
vegitarian, yes, vegitarian. 

Charlotte Smith Emmeline, or The Orphan of the Castle 1788
This book made Charlotte Smith's fortune and reputation and was followed by 
about a book a year until the end of the decade. Unfortunately the quality of 
the books to follow often wasn't as good. This is an awesome book about a woman 
stalked by a rich, good-looking, well-connected man who is an insensitive jerk. 
Emmeline is able to see this and cares more for her female friends until the 
hero enters the novel. Emmeline's female friends are anything but 
conventional--one has an adulterous affair and a baby out of wedlock, and 
another leaves her husband because he is a financial idiot (he tries to use old 
wigs as fertilizer!) Big, long, and full of detail of life in 1788, Emmeline is 
a good read. Unless of course you are a modern novel lover like the famed 
modern novelist who wrote the introduction to the Pandora edition and feels 
that maybe--if you accept that the novel is trashy soap opera--the book is 
worth buying more than a salad. The salad argument struck me as just another 
reason why I can't relate to modern authors ... 

Mary Wollstonecraft Mary, A Fiction 1788
This novel is almost always read for its parallels to Mary Wollstonecraft's 
real life. Its heroine is clearly from a severely dysfunctional family and all 
the wonderful jargon of twentieth-century clinical psychology can be applied to 
this novel with ease. Mary (the character) is an obsessive woman who fixates on 
people, who are dying, and binds up all her happiness in them. She isn't fussy 
about the sex of the people she obsesses on. 

Ann Radcliffe - anything by  Ann Radcliffe A Sicilian Romance 1790 Arno  Ann 
Radcliffe The Mysteries of Udolpho 1794
When I taught this novel in my Women Writers course at Cal State SB, I listed 
as key events to motivate my students' reading: " The Narrative Frame; The 
Mystery of the Southern Part of the Castle; A Stepmother's Jealousy; Love; A 
Forced Marriage; An Escape Attempt; A Wound; Imprisonment; A Pursuit; Banditti; 
Female Friendship; The Abbey; A Nun's Tale; Abate vs. Marquis; A Rescue; 
Another Rescue; The Marquis' Secret; Murders." The novel owes a lot to 
Stephanie Genlis' Adele et Theodore, ou Lettres sur l'education, which had 
English editions published in 1783, 1784, 1788, and 1796. Ann Radcliffe The 
Italian 1797
Some see this as Radcliffe's greatest. It is full of the Inquisition, evil 
religious figures of every sort, and great picturesque and sublime scenery 
descriptions. Vivid comic servants and an independent, self-employed heroine 
add to the enjoyment of the novel.

Helen Maria Williams Julia, A Novel 1790 
This tale of love triangles rewrites in a feminist way Jean Jacques Rousseau's 
international bestseller, La nouvelle Heloise. The novel includes poems, 
descriptions of sublime scenery, and satiric portraits of London's social 
climbers. One of my favorite scenes is the attempt to give a fashionable card 
party in a room too small with servants most incompetent. It's a comic gem! 

Isabella Kelly The Abbey of St. Asaph 1795 
Wonderfully fun read--the talking skull that is a hoax, an abandoned baby in a 
storm, the abandoned wife, the innocent recruited by a brothel, the kindly old 
man that keeps stomping on his wig, a duel, a rape attempt, a "ghost"--need I 
say more?

Charlotte Smith Montalbert 1795  The heroine must survive the evil suitor, an 
earthquake, imprisonment in a lonely castle, a pirate ship, a husband's 
jealousy, and madness!

Frances Burney Camilla 1796 The novel of a heroine who is charming, giddy, and 
wants so desperately to please father, mother, brother, sisters, uncle, lovers, 
and female friends that she ends up nearly killing herself because of the 
various disasters that overtake her family and friends. Vivid, rich individual 
characters; masterful scenes that amaze; rich social satire; clever exposure of 
the double standard of British society: all mix in this huge novel full of 
"God's plenty."
Mary Hays The Memoirs of Emma Courtney 1796 Emma is the Romantic-era stalker, 
obsessed with a man who won't marry her and won't tell her to get lost. The 
novel is incredibly rich in psychological detail but also includes forbidden 
embraces during a thunderstorm, carriage accidents, sexual harassment, 
abortion, and murder.

Charlotte Smith Marchmont 1796 {see her portrait}
In my opinion, this is Smith's greatest novel--others might argue for Emmeline, 
The Old Manor House, or Desmond--but these, while good works, to me lack the 
style, mood, tone, and social satire that distinguishes Marchmont from Smith's 
other works. When I hear certain period pieces of music, I find myself 
visualizing the lonely beach scenes from Marchmont. But the novel is more than 
moments of sublime or melancholy meditation-- its exposé of the sexism and 
double binds in the legal and penal systems is very similar to Dickens' social 
critique of these systems in Bleak House. The hero's role in the French 
revolution and the heroine's experiences in a seaside resort also convey unique 
pictures of different aspects of the times. 

Jane West A Gossip's Story 1797
Fascinating tale of two sisters--one who is involved in a very romantic 
friendship with another woman. In discussing this female friendship, the novel 
seems clearly to be referring to a lesbian subtext. The novel is extremely 
funny in its satire, and many speak of it as a model for Austen's Sense and 
Sensibility. 
 
Maria Edgeworth Belinda 1801 
A truly great novel! Edgeworth produces a novel that has a cast of memorable 
characters and manages to capture both the allure and the evil nature of London 
society at the turn of the century. The novel offers commentary on interracial 
relationships, educational systems, gambling, fashion, the rights of women, 
courtship, current medical treatments for breast cancer, women's friendships, 
breast feeding, and a host of other things. Don't be mislead by Harriot Freke, 
the clearly evil exaggeration of a Wollstonecraft feminist: Edgeworth is not 
completely conservative and uses her obvious attack on "Frekish" feminist to 
hide a lot of criticism of gender relationships in 1801. The novel is still 
pleasurable upon the second and third rereading; Lady Delacour is one of the 
great women characters in the history of the novel.

Charlotte Dacre. Zofloya; or, The Moor 1806
In this unusual Gothic novel, all of the main characters (and most of the minor 
ones as well) are evil. The murderous, adulterous, corrupting actions of two 
courtesans of Venice make up the bulk of the plot. The alliance of the Moor 
with evil is a racist stereotype. Ironically, the Moor's role is less to 
stimulate Victoria, the evil "heroine," to crime, than to counsel her to commit 
less obvious or punishable crimes.
 
Mary Brunton Discipline 1814 {see her portrait}
A great novel written in the first person which tells of a spoiled young 
woman's journey to maturity and love. Great details of the London season and 
Scottish city and country life. Novel covers great themes such as jealousy, 
pride, suicide, sexual harassment, the oppression of the poor, true friendship, 
and true love. The novel includes also a great ball scene, a fashionable 
auction scene, a wonderful masquerade scene, a scary madhouse scene, and some 
vivid depictions of the horror of poverty. 

Susan Ferrier Marriage 1818 {see her portrait}
Marriage is an enjoyable, funny novel dealing with the life of twin girls, born 
to a silly London beauty who eloped with a Scotsman. He was disinherited, and 
poverty in Scotland is too much for the beauty to endure. She leaves with one 
twin, Adelaide Julia, and leaves the other, Mary, to be raised in Scotland by 
her aunt, Mrs. Douglas, and her three great-aunts: Miss Jacky, Miss Grizzy, and 
Miss Nicky. Of course, when Mary is ready for marriage, she reunites with her 
sister and fun complications occur which of course contrast a fashionable 
London education and a good, moral Scottish education. 
