The books I wish to recommend are THE LIZARD CAGE by Karen Connelly and
ICEFIELDS by Thomas Wharton. Both are in soft cover.

Have we ever considered reading one children's book per year, or a poetry
collection?

Even better still - a cook book!


n her long-awaited first novel, Karen Connelly recreates the world of a Burmese 
prison, and of the country’s tumultuous years in the late 1980’s, when 
millions of people rose up to protest against the brutality of their military 
government. This is a story of human resilience, love and humour — a potent 
act of empathy and witness.

Inside his solitary confinement cell, Teza, who once electrified the people of 
Burma with his protest songs against the dictatorship, now applies his acute 
intelligence and Buddhist patience to finding meaning in the interminable days. 
Arrested by the Burmese secret police, cut off from his family for the first 
seven years of a twenty-year sentence, he searches for news and human 
connection in every object and being that is grudgingly allowed into his cell.

Despite his isolation, Teza has a profound influence on the people around him. 
His integrity and humour inspire the conscience-ridden senior jailer to radical 
change. His very existence challenges the brutal authority of the junior 
jailer, perversely nicknamed Handsome. Even though his server, the criminal 
Sein Yun, sees compromising Teza as his ticket out of jail, the singer 
befriends him, and falls into a trap of forbidden food, conversation, and the 
most dangerous contraband of all, pen and paper.

Lastly there’s Little Brother, an orphan who’s grown up inside the jail, 
imprisoned by his own deprivation. Teza and the boy are prisoners of different 
orders, but their extraordinary friendship frees both of them in utterly 
surprising ways. Overturning our expectations, Karen Connelly presents us with 
a world that celebrates human spirit, and spirit itself, in the midst of 
injustice and violence.



ICEFIELDs

During an expedition to the Arcturus glacier in 1898, British doctor Edward 
Byrne falls into a crevasse and spies something magical in the ice. While 
convalescing in the remote settlement of Jasper, he begins to grasp that the 
mysteries of this landscape are mirrored in its unusual inhabitants.

In his travels, Dr. Byrne uncovers near-mythical tales about the area and meets 
other eccentrics caught up in their own quests. He also becomes enamoured with 
Elspeth, a woman who shares his obsession with the things that lie hidden in 
the ice.

Told through a mixture of journal entries, clippings, scientific notes and 
letters, the novel blends history with fiction to tell a dazzling story of a 
singular place and time.

Icefields won numerous awards after its 1995 publication, including the 
Commonwealth Writers’ Prize for Best First Book, Canada and the Caribbean; 
the Henry Kriesel Award for Best First Book; the Writers’ Guild of Alberta 
Best First Book Award; and Grand Prize for Best Book Overall at the Banff 
Mountain Book Festival.
 


Tracked down by a young advertising executive, King Leary is invited to Toronto 
to record a ginger ale commercial alongside the NHL’s newest hockey sensation.

Leary travels to the big city with his roommate and a slightly off-kilter male 
nurse, but he’s also accompanied by his ghosts: Clay Clinton, his one-time 
best friend and former hockey manager; Manny Oz, Leary’s challenger for the 
crown; and the hockey-playing monks of Bowmanville Reformatory, where Leary’s 
career began.

The trip is a sometimes hilarious, sometimes heart-wrenching odyssey that 
reveals the truths of Leary’s not-always-illustrious life.

Published in 1987, King Leary won the Stephen Leacock Award for Humour and was 
shortlisted for the Trillium Award. The book has been out of print for some 
time, and is being republished with a new cover for Canada Reads.


Children’s books

Me and the Blondes
by Teresa Toten
Penguin Canada

Sophie is determined to make her grade nine year the best yet; if she can 
befriend the blondes and protect her family secret, she just might. With the 
help of her Bulgarian mother, doting Aunties, stellar basketball skills and 
charming wit, Sophie sets out to make a fresh start and discovers the true 
meaning of friendship


The Penelopiad
by Margaret Atwood
Knopf Canada

What really happened at home in Ithaca when Odysseus went adventuring 
frolicking with witches, slaying monsters and playing the hero? Was his wife 
Penelope really the personification of faithfulness? Atwood's Penelopiad turns 
this Greek epic upside down. Aided by her twelve maids, Penelope's voice, laced 
with irony, fills in the gaps; she waited 20 years for her hubby to come home! 
Whether you know Homer's original or not you will laugh out loud with this 
charming and beguiling heroine's darkly humourous tale.
